KEP-3488 Update Informational Type System (#3779)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/3488-cel-admission-control/README.md

  If the type check fails, mark the policy as misconfigured. Do not type check when the policy is being created or updated.
- `Always` Type check the referred `object`, `oldObject`, and `params` immediately when the policy is being created or updated. 
  If the type check fails, including the situation where the schema fails to resolve, the API server will reject the operation on the policy object. 
  The same type check will happen during compilation and evaluation.

The modes can be summarized as follows.

| Mode        | Value & Param Type | Warning status | Set Policy as misconfigured | Reject on creation/update |
|-------------|--------------------|----------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------|
| Never       | Unstructured       | No             | No                          | No                        |
| Informative | Unstructured       | Yes            | No                          | No                        |
| Evaluation  | Structured         | Yes            | Yes                         | No                        |

> | Always      | Structured         | Yes            | Yes                         | Yes                       |

Reviewer: Not blocking, but "Unstructured/Structured" here might be misunderstood to mean that we're using the Kubernetes unstructured type in some cases but the Go structs in others. I'd be okay with omitting the column entirely given that runtime type handling is the same regardless of if we pre-compile or not (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3779#discussion_r1093562846).

Author: `Unstructured` is really too overloaded a term. I am changing them to dynamic vs defined.

|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| version skew: ephemeralContainers case           | New pod field, need to be able to validate in same was containers and initContainers if field exists and is populated |
| version skew: Migration from annotation to field | Need to be able to validate annotation (if present) or field (if it exists and is populated)                          |
| CRD is deleted                                   | Nothing to type check against, but also means there are no coresponding custom resources                              |
| CRD is in multiple clusters, but schema differs  | If policy author is aware of the schema variations, can they write policies that work for all the variations?         |
| Validation of an aggregated API server type      | Main API server does not have type definitions                                                                        |

Due to these complications, Type checking will be optional which can be activated by an expression-level

> `TypeChecking` field. Possible modes are:

Reviewer 2: This is a lot of complexity to expose to the user. How are they supposed to anticipate whether or not their config will be subject to the problems listed above?

Reviewer 2: I think upgrade and downgrade are things that need actual solutions.

Backwards-incompatible CRD changes we can treat as not our problem.

Therefore I think we can lock this to a particular setting and not permit the user to change it. "Informative" might be the right one.

Author: That's a fair point. Would you think allowing the user to disable type check can be helpful? For example, `has` operator can check if a field exists, take the `ephemeralContainers` example again.
`has(somePod.ephemeralContainers) && somePod.ephemeralContainers[0].image == "busybox"` would populate warnings in Kubernetes < 1.23, but because of the `has` check, the type check error is a false alarm.

Reviewer 2: I think we need some plan for what to do around upgrades/downgrades. I'm not sure that's the best approach though...

Author: `Informative` mode is safe for upgrades/downgrades because it never fails the policy even if a type check error occurs. I will go ahead and make `Informative` the only mode to implement in this release. We can revisit this part in the next.

Author: I've updated the design to reflect the discussion. Please take another look when available. Thank you.

| CRD is in multiple clusters, but schema differs        | If policy author is aware of the schema variations, can they write policies that work for all the variations? |
| Validation of an aggregated API server type            | Main API server does not have type definitions |

Due to these complications, Type checking will be optional which can be activated by an expression-level

> `TypeCheckingMode` field. Possible modes are:

Author: +1 one shortening the name. I would really like to have the expression-level granularity but that would be too complex. So Yes, moving to the policy level.

> - `Never` Do not type check the referred object or the param any time. 

Author: I could not see what `Background` means either. How do you think of `Unstructured`? This would expose the fact that we are treating `object`, `params`, etc as unstructured, which is strictly an implementation detail that worth hiding, but most precise in terms of what we want to express.

> - `Never` Do not type check the referred object or the param any time. 

Reviewer: The two type error options are:
- Report in status of the policy definition
- Type check errors result in admission failures and are reported in responses of admission requests

Maybe `TypeChecking: (Informative, RuntimeError)` ?

I donno. Maybe just leave this as-is and we can discuss in API review..

> - `Never` Do not type check the referred object or the param any time. 

Author: Let's leave it as-is for now. `Never` is still valuable to silence all type-checking warning for these who know what they are doing.

> - `Never` Do not type check the referred object or the param any time. 

Author: I've added an `Informative` that reflects the design before this PR>

  Treat `object`, `oldObject`, and `params` as dynamic-typed unstructured objects. 

>   This behavior matches that of Kubernetes 1.26

Author: Good point.

- `Evaluation` Type check the referred `object`, `oldObject`, and `params` when the expression is being compiled and evaluated after the policy is created. 

>   If the type check fails, mark the policy as misconfigured. Do not type check when the policy is being created or updated.

Author: The best we can do is to return the type check errors as part of the failure message, taking the place of per-expression failure message. For example
```
- expression: "object.spec.replicas > 1" 
  message: "must be replicated"
```
This will compile and eval the expression, and return "must be replicated", 
```
- expression: "object.replicas > 1" 
  message: "must be replicated"
```
This will compile-error, and return the error from the compiler instead of the message.

>   If the type check fails, mark the policy as misconfigured. Do not type check when the policy is being created or updated.

Author: For the second point. `Never` should mean never, this is the explicit opt-out. Would you think "errors are reported but don't have any runtime implications" could be a new mode? Like the real "Informative" mode. We can make this default instead of `Never`.

However, making it informative comes with the previously mentioned how-to-report problem. I am thinking of extending the status beyond `misconfigured` or not, for example, by adding a specific field for type checking results.

>   If the type check fails, mark the policy as misconfigured. Do not type check when the policy is being created or updated.

Reviewer: > Would you think "errors are reported but don't have any runtime implications" could be a new mode? Like the real "Informative" mode. We can make this default instead of `Never`.

Yeah, an "Informative" mode could be useful for policy authors that want a simple way to check for type errors (it should be possible to provide type errors in the status of a policy definition even if there are no policy bindings defined). It could also be useful for cluster administrators to check for compatibility of a policy with a cluster before creating any bindings.  I would be okay with this being the default instead of `Never`.

> However, making it informative comes with the previously mentioned how-to-report problem. I am thinking of extending the status beyond `misconfigured` or not, for example, by adding a specific field for type checking results.

This sounds reasonable to me.

- `Always` Type check the referred `object`, `oldObject`, and `params` immediately when the policy is being created or updated. 
  If the type check fails, including the situation where the schema fails to resolve, the API server will reject the operation on the policy object. 

>   The same type check will happen during compilation and evaluation.

Author: The difference of these two would be whether we fail at `ValidatingAdmissionPolicy` creation. One special case I can think of would be when the user creates the policy first then the CRD. If there is a re-try loop, making it fail fast seems better, otherwise `Evaluation` would make more sense.
What do you thin?

>   The same type check will happen during compilation and evaluation.

Author: We should implement the modes in the order of `Never`, `Evaluation`, and `Always` while gather user input between releases.

>   The same type check will happen during compilation and evaluation.

Reviewer: SGTM. I like the idea of introducing `Never` and `Evaluation` first and seeing how it goes before investing in type checking on ValidatingAdmissionPolicy create/update.

The type check may fail in one of the three reasons:
1. The schema is resolved and parsed. The CEL library determines the expression is invalid;
2. The schema is resolved, but cannot be parsed. This is considered an internal error and will be logged;
3. The schema cannot be resolved because the referred type does not yet exist. This should be a transient error.

> If TypeCheckingMode is set to Evaluation, and either 2 or 3 happens, the compilation will fall back to unstructured as if TypeCheckingMode was set to Never. This allows the evaluation to continue before the referred CRDs are created or published.

Reviewer: One consequence of using `Never` this way is that it would possible to have an expression that accepts admission requests until the schemas resolve, at which point it type checking would be activated. If type checking fails then the requests would start to be rejected.

For a mistyped field name, e.g. `!has(object.spec.restrictionz)` could accidentally result in a policy definition that fails open even when `FailPolicy: Fail` is set?  Should we respect `FailPolicy` here?

Author: I think this use case would better be set to `Never`. Furthermore, everything that involves field existent check like `has` defeats much of the purpose of type checking.

Reviewer: Maybe this is a better example: `object.spec.condition ? object.spec.validfieldname : object.spec.mistypedfieldname`

I would want this to fail closed if type checking has not occurred (2 or 3 have happened).

Author: In this case, during the development phrase, this is better configured as `Always`. At runtime, `Evaluation` might be better.

> If TypeCheckingMode is set to Evaluation, and either 2 or 3 happens, the compilation will fall back to unstructured as if TypeCheckingMode was set to Never. This allows the evaluation to continue before the referred CRDs are created or published.

Reviewer 3: Parsed expressions run equivalently to checked expressions for the standard library, but they're slower. Since all of your custom functions are bound using e.g. `cel.Function()`, then the bindings will handle dynamic dispatch (what happens on parse vs. checked exprs) to various overloads automatically as well.

> If TypeCheckingMode is set to Evaluation, and either 2 or 3 happens, the compilation will fall back to unstructured as if TypeCheckingMode was set to Never. This allows the evaluation to continue before the referred CRDs are created or published.

Author: Thank you both for the information. I did know `Compile` means `Parse` then `Check`. Currently, we only use `Compile`. I can do some testing on how splitting these two stages would help.

@TristonianJones quick question. What would be difference of evaluating unchecked expression vs checked  but everything is `dyn` type. If everything is `dyn` then the dynamic dispatch problem would still exist. As of the past release (1.26), we treated everything as `dyn`.

> If TypeCheckingMode is set to Evaluation, and either 2 or 3 happens, the compilation will fall back to unstructured as if TypeCheckingMode was set to Never. This allows the evaluation to continue before the referred CRDs are created or published.

Reviewer 3: @jiahuif There's no change in evaluation semantics, just internal overhead to resolve which function to invoke.

> If TypeCheckingMode is set to Evaluation, and either 2 or 3 happens, the compilation will fall back to unstructured as if TypeCheckingMode was set to Never. This allows the evaluation to continue before the referred CRDs are created or published.

Author: Good to know. Thank you!

|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| version skew: ephemeralContainers case           | New pod field, need to be able to validate in same was containers and initContainers if field exists and is populated |
| version skew: Migration from annotation to field | Need to be able to validate annotation (if present) or field (if it exists and is populated)                          |
| CRD is deleted                                   | Nothing to type check against, but also means there are no coresponding custom resources                              |
| CRD is in multiple clusters, but schema differs  | If policy author is aware of the schema variations, can they write policies that work for all the variations?         |
| Validation of an aggregated API server type      | Main API server does not have type definitions                                                                        |

> Because of these complications, the type checking would remain informational rather than forced. 
> The type system is not designed to solve or mitigate any of the mentioned complications.
> This design is temporary, and will be revisited when any of the issues is addressed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Until the design is extended to handle these situations, the type checking will remain informational.
```

For example, accessing an unknown field will result a warning like this.

```yaml
...
status:
  expressionWarnings:
    - expression: "object.replicas > 1" # should be "object.spec.replicas > 1"
      warning: "no such field 'replicas'"
```

> To address the version skew problem that can occur during upgrade/downgrade, the type checking is designed to

Reviewer 2: I was trying to say it *should* be type checking and we need a real solution for upgrade/downgrade. Informational type checking doesn't seem to solve the actual problem, which is that expressions may not match schemas when the schema changes.

Author: I agree. Preserving schema during upgrade/downgrade is not something type checking alone can help with. Type checking is not designed to mitigate schema skews. This KEP acknowledges the upgrade/downgrade issue as part of current limitations. We will work on a solution against upgrade/downgrade independent of the type system, in another KEP update.

> never affect the verdict of the policy. This is useful when a new Kubernetes version adds a field that an expression refers to, which will continue to evaluate after the downgrade.

Reviewer 2: I don't see how you can promise that the verdict of something that fails to typecheck will not change when a schema changes?

Author: Sorry for the confusion. I meant that the type checking won't save a policy from a version skew. Type checking is not designed to mitigate schema drifts, hence "informational". I've updated the wording to signify this.
